to no known forms. We observe the heart and brain fostering, helping
and sometimes hindering, directing, controlling and guarding the
evolution of the nearer or remoter portions. We perceive on scrutiny
threads of relationship being woven, new nervous, muscular and
circulatory systems being developed, which connect the extremities
with the center and unite both into an organic whole. We are struck
at times with the rupture of the mass and the permanent separation of
parts of it; at times we are impressed by an unexpected augmentation
in previously unknown areas, as if to repair the loss of the old. We
witness the extremities reacting on the original nucleus, to some
extent remodeling the heart and brain and thus creating a type of
organism unprecedented in Nature. And we find that of a limited number
of such colossal types, ever battling for predominance, one or another
gains an ascendency and the rest are reduced to a secondary rank, or,
being lopped of their colonial extensions, cease to be world-wide
organisms and shrink into the merely national organisms from which they
sprang.

Snails put out their feelers as they go. The bolder insects and the
more adventurous birds fly small or great distances in search of a
feeding ground; some are carried out to sea, and become involuntary
‘discoverers’ of new lands.[C] The social organism puts out its feelers
and extends in mass. The community pushes out its scouts, and a portion
of it, at longer or shorter intervals, follows their lead. Thus the
mother country discovers many of the territories it colonizes. Cadiz
was unknown to the Eastern world till a Phœnician merchant ship was
blown thither. The West African coast and the mouth of the Rhone were
discovered by the Carthaginians. Libya (west of Egypt) was a _terra
incognita_ to the Greeks till a Greek sailor who had been driven on its
inhospitable coast informed the emigrant Theræans of its existence.
The Portuguese discovered the Azores. The Spaniards discovered the
West India Islands, Mexico, Peru and Florida. France discovered the
country lying along the basin of the St. Lawrence and the valley of
the Mississippi. Holland, through an English navigator, discovered
the Hudson River and the future site of New York. England, through
another alien, discovered the New England coast and that of Virginia;
it discovered, or rediscovered, vast Australia, New Zealand, Tasmania
and other South Sea islands; in quite recent years it discovered the
sources of the Nile. All these countries have been or are about to be
colonized by the peoples that discovered them.

    [C] Examples of insects are given in Darwin’s ‘Journal,’ and of
        birds in Wallace’s ‘Malay Archipelago.’

Discovery is chiefly the work of private enterprise. It was Phœnician
and Greek traders who explored the northern and western coasts of
Africa, of Spain, of Gaul, and of Britain. Scandinavian mariners,
Norman and English fishermen, discovered North America. Spanish
adventurers found the Canaries. The host of travelers have explored
on their private account. Yet there are animals, like Mr. Thompson’s
Lobo, the wolf, and Spot, the crow, able generals and leaders of large
bands, who seem to direct exploratory movements. So after a while
governments lend their aid when they have ends of their own or their
aid is needed. The two most memorable exploring expeditions of modern
times, and the most momentous in their results, were either in great
part or wholly equipped by their respective governments. Two of the
vessels of Columbus were impressed ships, and the equipment proceeded
from the Castilian treasury, the third being fitted out by merchant
mariners of Palos. The expedition of Captain Cook, which practically
added a new continent to the globe, was altogether a state enterprise,
and its celebrated commander was not, like Columbus, its designer
and organizer, but only its director. The Portuguese discoveries
of the Azores and the Cape were also state-aided. From this time
forward Spanish and Portuguese adventurers received a royal license to
discover, and the South American continent, with Mexico and Peru as
its brightest jewels, was discovered by just such adventurers. Where a
government refuses itself to discover, it may, like the States-General
of Holland, assure to the enterprising a terminable monopoly of trade
with newly discovered lands, and to this assurance the exploration of
New York and its neighborhood and the discovery of Connecticut were
due. Merchant companies have naturally a keen eye to the main chance,
but those English and Dutch merchants can not be accused of timidity
who chartered Cabot, Gilbert, Hudson and other daring mariners to seek
a northwest passage to the East. Kings, in their private capacity,
newspaper proprietors and rich individuals, from generous motives,
sometimes equip and support explorers like Stanley and Winwood Reade.

Geographical, like scientific, discovery is often accidental. Phœnician
and Greek traders, Spanish adventurers, Norman and English fishermen
were blown by a succession of gales to Cadiz and Cyrene, the Canaries,
Mexico and Newfoundland. Diaz was storm-carried southward to the Cape,
where two shipwrecked mariners long afterward induced the Dutch to
settle. Columbus, Cabot and Hudson sought a passage to India or China.
The day comes, however, when chance gives way to a systematic art of
discovery. The voyage of Columbus was the first where the end was
deliberately aimed at and patiently worked up to. Under Ferdinand the
Catholic maritime discovery was raised to an art. A board of eminent
Spanish navigators, with Vespucci at its head, sat to construct
charts and trace out routes for projected voyages. The primary object
of Cook’s first voyage was astronomical, and he was scientifically
equipped for discovery on that, as of course also on the two later
voyages, whose sole end was the one so gloriously gained.

Prior discovery confers an indefeasible title to occupy as against
any other colonizing power. Misled by a false statement, a British
man-of-war entered the Mississippi presumably to take possession of
Louisiana, but turned aside on being informed of the earlier French
occupation. In the thirties two naval expeditions were exploring at
the same time in Spencer Gulf, South Australia. Though the French
gracefully yielded the _pas_ to the prior English ship, they left a
mark on a number of points that still bear French names. There seems
to be now no doubt that Brazil had been discovered and rediscovered by
Spanish navigators before the Portuguese _carbajal_ set foot on it,
but, owing to an international agreement, the discoverers ceded their
claim.

Discovery does not necessarily issue in colonization. The more or less
mythical discoveries of the coasts of North America and Australia in
the ninth and sixteenth centuries interest the antiquarian rather
than the historian. They resemble the so-called anticipations of
scientific discoveries--Cesalpino’s, of Harvey; Vico’s, of Wolf and
Niebuhr; Swedenborg’s, of Kant; and a host of guessers, of Darwin. As
proof alone is discovery in science, so only exploration is discovery
in geography. For lack of this essential element even well-certified
discoveries are apt to be fruitless. Tasman’s frightened glimpse of New
Zealand and his more careful coasting of Tasmania left durable marks
on both countries, but only in nomenclature. They led to nothing. No
Dutch settlement seems ever to have been made south of New Guinea; no
northern nationality is more conspicuously absent among the colonizers
of the South Seas. The earlier Portuguese discovery of the Cape of
Good Hope was regarded as that of a halfway house to a more distant
goal; they stopped to recruit, then hurried off to rich Cathay. The
French left their names to a dozen headlands and rivers on the coast of
Western Australia, but, though they often excited the suspicions of New
South Wales, they made no attempt to settle.

Discovery, to assure sovereignty over the discovered country, must
be followed, among animals as among men, by effective occupation. The
Portuguese were roused into warlike excitement a few years ago by
the advance of the Chartered Company into Mashonaland, where their
settlements had long ceased to exist. Their claims to the basin of the
Congo were on the same ground equally disregarded--this time by all
the powers. A bit of seacoast can more easily be kept, and Delagoa
Bay was assured to them by the French arbitrator. Mere occupation has
at various times given a valid right to a territory. The Puritans
found several islands off the New England coast to be destitute of
inhabitants, and the shores so thinned of Indians by an epidemic as
to be practically uninhabited. Yet they were careful to assure their
title by purchase. The Manowolko Islands of the Malay Archipelago were
without indigenes when the first settlers arrived. Pitcairn and Norfolk
Islands were found by the mutineers of the Bounty and the convicts
from New South Wales to answer to Defoe’s notion of a desert island.
The first English settlers in Australia and the first French settlers
in New Caledonia met with no resistance from the blacks at the initial
stages of occupation. When the Boers trekked across the Vaal they
entered on a country that had been left, through exterminating native
wars, to the beasts of the field and the forest. The situation is very
different when a rival civilized power lays claims to the territory.
When Great Britain forcibly took possession of West Griqualand in
1871 she had to salve, without satisfying, the claims of the Orange
Free State to one of the richest diamond fields in the world by a
payment differently stated at £90,000 and over £100,000. Having to deal
with a European power, she was constrained to submit to arbitration
her pretensions to the so very useful and convenient Delagoa Bay.
In attempting to extend British Guiana, so as to gain command of
the Orinoco, she came into collision with the mightiest of American
peoples, which now guards the interests of all the others. The United
States refused to acknowledge the doctrine of ‘squatter sovereignty,’
and one of the preliminaries of the Venezuela arbitration was the
addition to international law of the rule that a period of fifty years’
uninterrupted occupancy was required to constitute valid sovereignty.
England has gone through the world, like Sir Tantalus’s man with
his iron flail, beating down the weak and robbing the helpless. Yet
few countries can show an equal record of honorable renunciations.
It long refused to annex New Zealand, now one of the finest of its
colonies. It long refused Fiji and Natal. It refused Samoa. It
refused Bechuanaland for a time. It refused Angra Pequena. It would
not listen to the discoverer who called on it to occupy equatorial
Africa. It disavowed the action of Queensland in annexing New Guinea.
It surrendered the Ionian Islands. Its constant injunction to its high
commissioner in South Africa was not to advance the line of conquest.
It surrendered, in 1854, its sovereignty over the Boers of the Orange
River. That surrender was condemned by British governors, is still
condemned by historians, and was disliked by the wealthier and more
intelligent Boers; how wise and just it was is shown by the jealousy
with which the republic has since watched over its independence. To
its eternal honor--or rather to that of Gladstone--it nobly gave
back the Transvaal to its stalwart farmers. France long relinquished
Algeria and Madagascar, which her missions and commercial stations
in the seventeenth century gave her a prescriptive right to occupy
two centuries later. It refused to support De La Tours, and abandoned
Labourdonnais and Dupleix. Through mere inertia Portugal has let slip
from her hands a grand inheritance. The Dutch repressed the extension
of their colony at the Cape. Java flourishes, but Dutch New Guinea lies
rotting.

A species, extending beyond its original habitat, has often to battle
with lower species already in possession of that portion of the earth
or water. So, except in rare cases, occupation means the necessity of
conquest. The Puritans, as they advanced into the interior, had to
fight for the possession of New England. The nomadic Australian blacks
offered no resistance to the earliest settlers, but as they were driven
inward they disputed, and are still fiercely disputing, every foot
of territory. As the indigenes rise in the scale, have clearings and
cultivate the soil, the resistance increases. No savage peoples have
cost the invaders so much in disturbance, blood and treasure as the
Indians, Maoris, Kaffirs and Algerian Arabs. Mashonaland was occupied
by the Chartered Company without firing a shot or losing a life, but
it had soon to fight for possession. The incessant turmoil, though the
waves of it spread to the remote mother country, affects the settlers
mainly. The blood shed is both colonial and metropolitan. The North
American settlers fought their own hard battles; though British troops
engaged, to their cost, with the Indians, it was against these as
allies of the French; in recent years the British garrison in Canada
has been employed against the half-castes. In New Zealand colonial
volunteers joined with the regular troops to defeat the Maoris, and the
former were sometimes found the more efficient.

The most picturesque conquests in history were effected by private
enterprise. Mexico was conquered by local recruits. Pizarro was
authorized to conquer Peru in the name of the Spanish crown, and,
besides various other encouragements, he received a modest sum from
the Spanish treasury. But it was again by local recruits, not one
of them furnished by the Spanish Government, that the conquest was
made and maintained. Algeria has a very different story to tell. The
troops employed in effecting a difficult conquest spread over thirty
years were French from first to last. In general, it may be said that
where there have been regular campaigns and pitched battles the
metropolitan troops bear the brunt of the fighting. Where there is a
guerrilla warfare, as with the Australian blacks, it is carried on
by the colonial police or by the settlers, sometimes with the aid of
the natives themselves. The Carthaginians built up their empire by
native auxiliaries. The French and English conquered Canada with the
Hurons and Iroquois as auxiliaries. The English mastered New Zealand
with Maoris for allies, and defeated the Kaffirs with the help of
the Fingoes (a related variety of the Bantu race). Rhodesia was won
by a force half Kaffir. Peruvians aided Pizarro. India has been made
British by armies of which four fifths were Indian. A people, like
a man, contributes to its own subjugation. The expense is likewise
distributed. Fifty years of intermittent war with the Kaffirs cost
Great Britain twelve million pounds, and it may safely be assumed
that a no smaller sum was expended in New Zealand. The colonists
honorably bear their share. The premier of the latter colony told a
London audience in jubilee year that it was now cheerfully paying the
interest on a debt of eleven millions incurred in “holding the colony
for the empire.” After a Kaffir war Cape Colony was saddled with a
debt of three or four millions. Other losses fall more directly on the
settlers. Probably none have borne such disasters and so much suffering
as the early colonists of North America. The destruction of property
in a single New Zealand campaign amounted to £150,000, and the farmers
on the frontiers of Cape Colony have suffered far more severely, as
those on the frontier of Queensland are suffering now. If blood and
money, poured forth like water, can furnish conquest with a valid title
to territory, not a few British and French colonies have been justly
annexed.

The expansion of an organism or a species is determined also by its
struggle with other equal organisms or species which conflict with it.
The hardest fight is with individuals of the same or similar species.
So are rival colonizing powers usually more formidable opponents to the
acquisition of a country than its indigenes. The Carthaginians were
robbed of some of their colonies by the more numerous Greeks, and the
Greeks of many of theirs by the all-conquering Romans. The Swedes lost
a colony to the Dutch. The short but decisive struggle between the
Dutch and the English was followed by the loss of the Dutch colonies
in North America and the West Indies. In the eighteenth century,
after every great war a group of colonies fell into the hands of the
victorious power. The West India Islands and those of the Indian Ocean
were for many years tossed as in a game of battledore and shuttlecock
between France and England. The possession of Canada was a bone of
contention between the two countries for several decades. Seeley
even maintains that the hundred years’ war ending in 1815 was a long
rivalry between France and England for the New World and India. If
so, it was marked by striking acts of generosity. Conquests made in
Canada by England, with the efficient aid of the American colonies,
were more than once given back to France. When all but two of the West
India colonies were surrendered in 1814 the Foreign Minister explained
that it was desired to open to France the means of peaceful expansion,
and it was not the interest of England to make her a military and
conquering power. The rivalry did not end with the Napoleonic wars.
According to one historian, Australia was saved to the English in 1788
by six days, and for long afterward there was a constant jealousy of
French occupation. Ships were sent by Australian governors to take
possession of Van Diemen’s Land, of southern, western and northern
Australia when it was believed that the French had designs on them.
An English war ship, sent by the governor of the North Island of New
Zealand to annex the rich and fertile South Island, anticipated by
only a few hours a French ship dispatched for the same purpose. The
rising of the French Canadians in 1838 has been described as “the last
convulsion of despair of a sinking nationality.” The English, French,
and now the Germans are still rivals in present and future colonizing
grounds in Africa, China, and the South Seas. But no British colonist
doubts that further pacific defeats (if only by being bought out of
their possessions) await the French in different quarters of the globe,
for it is the colonies that press forward. The North American colonies
were at all times more aggressive than the mother state, as the
Australasian are now. They are unconsciously on the way to become the
suns of new systems.

Conquests may be made on various pretexts. The Cape was twice seized by
the English to prevent it from falling into the hands of the French,
and a few years later the Dutch were constrained to cede the colony to
its temporary possessors. Gambetta schemed to annex and colonize the
whole North African coast from Egypt to Morocco, and thus to create a
_France nouvelle_ along the northern shores of the Mediterranean in
place of the New France lost in Canada more than a century before,
or of that still older New France on the shores of the Bosporus. In
pursuance of this policy, the powers at the Berlin Conference in 1878
permitted France to occupy (not to annex) Tunis, prohibiting her,
however, from fortifying its chief port. But no one doubts that the
‘regency’ there, as in Madagascar, will speedily give way to undisputed
sovereignty, and Bizerta is already fortified. Writers are said to
be dreamers, and Locke’s constitution for Carolina, Rousseau’s for
Corsica, Bentham’s for Russia, with many another quixotic proposal,
furnish proof of their simplicity or their wrong-headedness. It is
nevertheless a fact that most of the new ideas that are being carried
into effect are the suggestions of publicists--journalists who stand
midway between men of thought and men of action. Sometimes the former
contribute immediately practicable proposals. Russia, Germany, France,
and Great Britain--the four grasping powers--along with Italy and
Belgium, are now, after a digestive interval of thirty years, carrying
out a suggestion made by Renan in 1871. The Chinese, who threw off the
yoke of the conquering Mongols, belong (it appears) by ordination of
Nature to the subject races. The people that produced Confucius and
Lao-tze consist of laboring men who need direction and organization.
China, therefore, calls for conquest. The powers have obeyed the call,
and that vast and peaceful land is now undergoing dismemberment, with a
view to final wholesale partition. It is a parallel to the conquest of
Peru by the Spaniards. In both countries a more perfect civilization of
a lower type was or will be superseded by a less perfect civilization
of a higher type. In this alone lies its assumed justification.
Evidently the argument may be carried far. It would justify Russia in
occupying Turkey, the United States in conquering not only Spanish
colonies but Spain itself. It was the moral justification of the Gothic
invasions of the early Christian centuries. It is a sentence of death
or (it may be) of new life to all moribund nationalities.

Other modes of acquiring colonies are by cession and by purchase. The
former is often disguised conquest, like that of the Cape to England.
The latter may be so as well, like that of the African diamond fields
by England. Colbert bought, for less than a million francs, certain
of the West India Islands and the Antilles. The United States has
bought her last colonies from dying Spain for four million pounds. At
no distant time the Australian colonies will probably buy France and
Germany out of the Pacific, and Holland and Germany out of New Guinea.
It will be none the less a moral conquest. The right of the stronger,
or the more fit to colonize, will still be, as it ever has been, the
sole title to possess.

By these various means habitats have been found for future colonies,
spheres for future colonial expansion.

[_To be continued._]




