by the aid of Newton’s law of gravitation. But they proved just as
conclusively that these planetary orbits, as they are called, could not
maintain indefinitely the same shapes or positions. Slow indeed might
be the changes they were destined to undergo; slow, but sure, with that
sureness belonging to celestial science alone. And so men asked: Has
this magnificent solar system been built upon a scale so grand, been
put in operation subject to a law sublime in its very simplicity, only
to change and change until at length it shall lose every semblance of
its former self, and end perhaps in chaos or extinction?

Laplace was able to answer confidently: No. Nor was his answer couched
in the enthusiastic language of unbalanced theorists who work by the
aid of imagination alone. Based upon the irrefragable logic of correct
mathematical reasoning, and clad in the sober garb of mathematical
formulæ, his results carried conviction to men of science the world
over. So was it demonstrated that changes in our solar system are
surely at work, and shall continue for nearly countless ages; yet just
as surely will they be reversed at last, and the system will tend to
return again to its original form and condition. The objection that
the Newtonian law meant ultimate dissolution of the world was thus
destroyed by Laplace. From that day forward, the law of gravitation has
been accepted as holding sway over all phenomena visible within our
planetary world.

The intricacies of our own solar system being thus illumined, the
restless activity of the human intellect was stimulated to search
beyond for new problems and new mysteries. Even more fascinating than
the movements of our sun and planets are all those questions that
relate to the clustered stellar congeries hanging suspended within
the deep blue vault of night. Does the same law of gravitation cast
its magic spell over that hazy cloud of Pleiads, binding them, like
ourselves, with bonds indissoluble? Who shall answer, yes or no? We can
only say that astronomers have as yet but stepped upon the threshold of
the universe, and fixed the telescope’s great eye upon that which is
within.

Let us then begin by reminding the reader what is meant by that
Newtonian law of gravitation. It appears all things possess the
remarkable property of attracting or pulling each other. Newton
declared that all substances, solid, liquid or even gaseous, from the
massive cliff of rock down to the invisible air--all matter can no more
help pulling than it can help existing. His law further formulates
certain conditions governing the manner in which this gravitational
attraction is exerted; but these are mere matters of detail; interest
centers about the mysterious fact of attraction itself. How can one
thing pull another with no connecting link through which the pull can
act? Just here we touch the point that has never yet been explained.
Nature withholds from science her ultimate secrets. They that have
pondered longest, that have descended farthest of all men into the
clear well of knowledge, have done so but to sound the depths beyond,
never touching bottom.

This inability of ours to give a good physical explanation of
gravitation has led numerous paradoxers to doubt or even deny that
there is any such thing. But fortunately we have a simple laboratory
experiment that helps us. Unexplained it may ever remain, but that
there can be attraction between physical objects connected by no
visible link is proved by the behavior of an ordinary magnet. Place
a small piece of steel or iron near a magnetized bar, and it will at
once be so strongly attracted that it will actually fly to the magnet.
Any one who has seen this simple experiment can never again deny the
possibility at least of the law of attraction as stated by Newton. Its
possibility once admitted, the fact that it can predict the motions
of all the planets, even shown to the minutest details, transforms
the possibility of its birth into a certainty as strong as any human
certainty can ever be.

But this demonstration of Newton’s law is limited strictly to the
solar system itself. We may indeed reason by analogy, and take for
granted that a law which holds within our immediate neighborhood is
extremely likely to be true also of the entire visible universe. But
men of science are loath to reason thus; and hence the fascination
of researches in cosmic astronomy. Analogy points out the path. The
astronomer is not slow to follow; but he seeks ever to establish upon
incontrovertible evidence those truths which at first only his daring
imagination had led him to half suspect. If we are to extend the law
of gravitation to the utmost, we must be careful to consider the law
itself in its most complete form. A heavenly body like the sun is
often said to govern the motions of its family of planets; but such a
statement is not strictly accurate. The governing body is no despot;
’tis an abject slave of law and order, as much as the tiniest of
attendant planets. The action of gravitation is mutual, and no cosmic
body can attract another without being itself in turn subject to that
other’s gravitational action. If there were in our solar system but
two bodies, sun and planet, we should find each one pursuing a path
in space under the influence of the other’s attraction. These two
paths or orbits would be oval, and if the sun and planet were equally
massive, the orbits would be exactly alike, both in shape and size.
But if the sun were far larger than the planet, the orbits would still
be similar in form, but the one traversed by the larger body would
be small. For it is not reasonable to expect a little planet to keep
the big sun moving with a velocity as great as that derived by itself
from the attraction of the larger orb. Whenever the preponderance of
the larger body is extremely great, its orbit will be correspondingly
insignificant in size. This is in fact the case with our own sun.
So massive is it in comparison with the planets, that the orbit is
too small to reveal its actual existence without the aid of our most
refined instruments. The path traced out by the sun’s center would not
fill a space as large as the sun’s own bulk. Nevertheless, true orbital
motion is there.

So we may conclude that as a necessary consequence of the law of
gravitation every object within the solar system is in motion. To
say that planets revolve about the sun is to neglect as unimportant
the small orbit of the sun itself. This may be sufficiently accurate
for ordinary purposes; but it is unquestionably necessary to neglect
no factor, however small, if we propose to extend our reasoning to a
consideration of the stellar universe. For we shall then have to deal
with systems in which the planets are of a size comparable with the
sun; and in such systems all the orbits will also be of comparatively
equal importance.

Mathematical analysis has derived another fact from discussion of
the law of gravitation which perhaps transcends in simple grandeur
everything we have as yet mentioned. It matters not how great may
be the number of massive orbs threading their countless interlacing
curved paths in space, there yet must be in every cosmic system one
single point immovable. This point is called the Center of Gravity. If
it should so happen that in the beginning of things, some particle of
matter were situated at this center, then would that atom ever remain
unmoved and imperturbable throughout all the successive vicissitudes
of cosmic evolution. It is doubtful whether the mind of man can form a
conception of anything grander than such an immovable atom within the
mysterious intricacies of cosmic motion.

But in general, we can not suppose that the centers of gravity in the
various stellar systems are really occupied by actual physical bodies.
The center may be a mere mathematical point in space, situated among
the several bodies composing the system, but nevertheless endowed with
the same remarkable property of relative immobility.

Having thus defined the center of gravity in its relation to the
constituent parts of any cosmic system, we can pass easily to its
characteristic properties in connection with the inter-relation of
stellar systems with one another. It can be proved mathematically that
our solar system will pull upon distant stars just as though the sun
and all the planets were concentrated into one vast sphere having its
center in the center of gravity of the whole. It is this property of
the center of gravity which makes it preëminently important in cosmic
researches. For, while we know that center to be at rest relatively to
all the planets in the system, it may, nevertheless, in its quality as
a sort of concentrated essence of them all, be moving swiftly through
space under the pull of distant stars. In that case, the attendant
bodies will go with it--but they will pursue their evolutions within
the system, all unconscious that the center of gravity is carrying them
on a far wider circuit.

What is the nature of that circuit? This question has been for many
years the subject of earnest study by the clearest minds among
astronomers. The greatest difficulty in the way is the comparatively
brief period during which men have been able to make astronomical
observations of precision. Space and time are two conceptions that
transcend the powers of definition possessed by any man. But we can at
least form a notion of how vast is the extent of time, if we remember
that the period covered by man’s written records is registered but
as a single moment upon the great revolving dial of heaven’s dome.
One hundred and fifty years have elapsed since James Bradley built
the foundations of sidereal astronomy upon his masterly series of
star-observations at the Royal Observatory of Greenwich, in England.
Yet so slowly do the movements of the stars unroll themselves upon the
firmament, that even to this day no one of them has been seen by men
to trace out more than an infinitesimal fraction of its destined path
through the voids of space.

Travelers upon a railroad can not tell at any given moment whether they
are moving in a straight line, or whether the train is turning upon
some curve of huge size. The St. Gothard railway has several so-called
‘corkscrew’ tunnels, within which the rails make a complete turn in a
spiral, the train finally emerging from the tunnel at a point almost
vertically over the entrance. In this way the train is lifted to a
higher level. Passengers are wont to amuse themselves while in these
tunnels by watching the needle of an ordinary pocket compass. This
needle, of course, always points to the north; and as the train turns
upon its curve, the needle will make a complete revolution. But the
passenger could not know without the compass that the train was not
moving in a perfectly straight line. Just so we passengers on the earth
are unaware of the kind of path we are traversing, until, like the
compass, the astronomer’s instruments shall reveal to us the truth.

But as we have seen, astronomical observations of precision have not as
yet extended through a period of time corresponding to the few minutes
during which the St. Gothard traveler watches the compass. We are still
in the dark, and do not know as yet whether mankind shall last long
enough upon the earth to see the compass needle make its revolution.
We are compelled to believe that the motion in space of our sun is
progressing upon a curved path; but so far as precise observations
allow us to speak, we can but say that we have as yet moved through
an infinitesimal element only of that mighty curve. However, we know
the point upon the sky towards which this tiny element of our path is
directed, and we have an approximate knowledge of the speed at which we
move.

More than a century ago Sir William Herschel was able to fix roughly
what we call the Apex of the sun’s way in space, or the point among the
stars towards which that way is for the moment directed. We say for the
moment, but we mean that moment of which Bradley saw the beginning in
1750, and upon whose end no man of those now living shall ever look.
Herschel found that a comparison of old stellar observations seemed
to indicate that the stars in a certain part of the sky were opening
out, as it were, and that the constellations in the opposite part of
the heavens seemed to be drawing in, or becoming smaller. There can be
but one reasonable explanation of this. We must be moving towards that
part of the sky where the stars are separating. Just so a man watching
a regiment of soldiers approaching, will see at first only a confused
body of men. But as they come nearer the individual soldiers will seem
to separate, until at length each one is seen distinct from all the
others.

Herschel fixed the position of the apex at a point in the constellation
Hercules. The most recent investigations of Newcomb, published only a
few months ago, have, on the whole, verified Herschel’s conclusions.
With the intuitive power of rare genius, Herschel had been able to
sift truth out of error. The observational data at his disposal would
now be called rude, but they disclosed to the scrutiny of his acute
understanding the germ of truth that was in them. Later investigators
have increased the precision of our knowledge, until we can now say
that the present direction of the solar motion is known within very
narrow limits. A tiny circle might be drawn on the sky, to which an
astronomer might point his hand and say: Yonder little circle contains
the goal towards which the sun and planets are hastening to-day. Even
the speed of this motion has been subjected to measurement, and found
to be about ten miles per second.

The objective point and the rate of motion thus stated, exact science
holds her peace. Here genuine knowledge stops; and we can proceed
further only by the aid of that imagination which men of science need
to curb at every moment. But let no one think that the sun will ever
reach the so-called apex. To do so would mean cosmic motion upon a
straight line, while every consideration of celestial mechanics points
to motion upon a curve. When shall we turn sufficiently upon that
curve to detect its bending? ’Tis a problem we must leave as a rich
heritage to later generations that are to follow us. The visionary
theorist’s notion of a great central sun, controlling our own sun’s way
in space, must be dismissed as far too daring. But for such a central
sun we may substitute a central center of gravity belonging to a great
system of which our sun is but an insignificant member. Then we reach a
conception that has lost nothing in the grandeur of its simplicity, and
is yet in accord with the probabilities of sober mechanical science.
We cease to be a lonely world, and stretch out the bonds of a common
relationship to yonder stars within the firmament.




A BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH OF AN INFANT[H].
