establishment of these evolutionary principles, exploration at home
and abroad has greatly increased the store of recorded facts; the more
civilized countries have been in large part measured and mapped; the
coasts of the world have been charted; the less civilized continents
have been penetrated to their centers. This harvest of fact has been an
indispensable stimulus to the study of physical geography; yet it can
not be doubted that the spirit which has given life to the letter of
the subject is the principle of evolution--inorganic and organic. This
is especially true of the geography of the lands.

The century has seen the measurement of higher peaks in the Himalayas
than had been previously measured in the Andes. The Nile has been
traced to its source in the lakes of equatorial Africa, verifying the
traditions of the ancients; and the Kongo has been found to cross the
equator twice on its way to the sea. Facts without number have been
added to the previous sum of knowledge. But at the same time, it has
been discovered that the valleys of mountain ranges are the work of
erosion; that the product of valley erosion is often seen in extensive
piedmont fluviatile plains; that waterfalls are retrogressively
worn away until they are reduced to the smooth grade of a maturely
established river; and that interior basins are slowly filling with the
waste that is washed in from their rims upon their floors. Here are
explanatory generalizations, involving, yet going far beyond matter of
direct observation. Such generalizations in geography correspond to the
recognition in astronomy that planetary movements exemplify the law of
gravitation; they are the Newton as against the Kepler of the subject.

The sufficient justification of the demand that has now arisen for
explanation and correlation in the study of land forms is found in the
repeated experience that until an explanatory description of a region
can be given, one may be sure that some of its significant elements
pass unnoticed; and until the controls that it exerts on living forms
are studied, one may be confident that its geographical value is but
half measured. A sentence from Guyot’s Earth and Man may here be taken
as a guide: “To describe, without rising to the causes, or descending
to the consequences, is no more science than merely and simply to
relate a fact of which one has been a witness.” There could hardly
be devised a more concise and searching test of good work than this
quotation suggests. The causes, in so far as the physical geography of
the lands is concerned, have been learned chiefly through the study of
geology; yet it does not by any means follow that all geologists are
possessed of such knowledge of these causes as will constitute them
geographers. The consequences have been learned through the study of
evolutionary biology; yet a distinct addition to the usual discipline
of biology is required in order to apprehend its geographical
correlations. The limited space allowed to this article will require
that further consideration of the consequences be excluded, in order to
give due consideration to the causes.

One of the preparatory steps in the century’s advance was taken
by the German geographer, Ritter, who, near the beginning of the
century, advocated a new principle that may be illustrated by the
change in the definition of geography from “the description of the
earth and its inhabitants” to “the study of the earth in relation
to its inhabitants;” but advance beyond this beginning was for
a long time obstructed by certain ancient beliefs. Theological
preconceptions as to the age of the earth and the associated geological
doctrine of catastrophism, although attacked by the rising school of
uniformitarianism, were then dominant. They gave to the geographer
a ready-made earth, on which the existing processes of change were
unimportant. Furthermore, the belief in the separate creation of every
organic species led to the doctrine of teleology, which maintained the
predetermined fitness of the earth for its inhabitants, and of its
inhabitants for their lifework. All this had to be outgrown before
geographers could understand the slow development of land forms and the
progressive adaptation of all living beings to their environments. Yet
the beginning that Ritter made was of great importance, and it would
have led further had it not happened that for many decades professors
of geography in Europe brought chiefly a historical training to their
chairs, to the almost entire neglect of physical geography. In the
last thirty years there has been a reaction from this condition in
Germany and France, but Italy, with many professors of geography in her
universities, still for the most part follows historical methods.

In the victory of the uniformitarians over the catastrophists began
the fortunate alliance of geography with geology, which was long
afterwards happily phrased by Mackinder: “Geology considers the past
in the light of the present; geography considers the present in the
light of the past.” Instead of believing in cataclysmic upheavals and
in overwhelming floods, Playfair and other exponents of the Huttonian
school taught that mountains were slowly upheaved and slowly worn down.
The simplicity of Playfair’s argument finds excellent illustration in
the often quoted passage regarding the origin of valleys: “Every river
appears to consist of a main trunk, fed from a variety of branches,
each running in a valley proportioned to its size, and all of them
together forming a system of vallies, communicating with one another,
and having such a nice adjustment of their declivities that none of
them join the principal valley either on too high or too low a level;
a circumstance which would be infinitely improbable if each of these
vallies were not the work of the stream that flows in it.” Descriptions
of valleys should always recognize the share that rivers have had in
eroding them, or else the “nice adjustment of their declivities” may
pass unnoticed.

It should be noted, however, that to this day explanation is not always
allowed an undisputed place in the treatment of the lands, however
fully it is accepted as appropriate to the presentation of other
divisions of physical geography. But the manner in which explanation
is extending over a larger and larger part of the subject gives
assurance that the geographers of the coming century will insist upon
a uniformly rational treatment of all divisions of their science. The
active phenomena of the earth’s surface first secured explanation; it
has long been considered essential to explain as well as to describe
such phenomena as the winds of the air and the currents of the ocean;
indeed, this is now so habitual that many geographers who may object
to the explanation of a peculiar kind of a valley as a trespass upon
geology, will nevertheless demand an explanation of rainfall and tides,
although these truly geographical subjects are manifestly shared with
physics and astronomy. Land forms of very elementary character, like
deltas, or of rapid production, like volcanoes, have had to give some
account of themselves all through the century; but it was not for many
years after the announcement of Playfair’s law, that the erosion of
valleys by the rivers that drain them came to be regarded as a subject
appropriate to a geographical treatise. Only in the later years of
the century has the fuller treatment of this beautiful subject been
attempted; even now much of it remains to be developed in the century
to come.

The treatment of physical geography will be much more even, to the
great advantage of its students, when explanatory description is
applied to all its parts. The alluvial fans at the base of arid
mountains should be accounted for as well as the dunes of deserts.
The fault cliffs of broken plateau blocks and the weathered cliffs of
retreating escarpments deserve to be considered as carefully as the
wave-cut cliffs of coasts; the essential differences of these forms are
reached most easily through their explanation. The varied sculpturing
of a mountain slope may, in time, come to be as well understood as is
now the erosion of a simple valley in a low plain.

One of the most notable elements of the century’s progress is the
increasing breadth of view gained as explanatory descriptions are
extended further and further over the geographical field. At first
explanation was given to various individual features, item by item;
now it is recognized that an appropriate place must be provided for
all kinds of land forms in a comprehensive scheme of physiographic
classification. Many instances of the earlier stage might be given,
beginning with examples from the works of Humboldt, the acknowledged
leader of scientific explorers in the opening decades of the century.
His attempts, more or less completely successful, to explain the facts
that he observed, as well as to correlate life with environment, may be
traced all through his writings; but his ‘Cosmos’ (1845) did not reach
a careful discussion of land forms, although it entered so far into an
explanatory treatment as to consider the formation of mountain ranges.

Innumerable examples of isolated facts and special explanations,
unrelated to a comprehensive scheme of physiographic classification,
might be taken from the reports of exploring expeditions and of
geological surveys; from books of travel and from geographical and
geological journals with which the nineteenth century has filled so
many library shelves; but lack of space will prevent mention of all
sources, save a few treatises in which the accumulated knowledge
of their time is summarized. Such a work as Mrs. Somerville’s
‘Physical Geography’ (1848) gives in the early pages a brief general
consideration of land forms, and then enters at once upon the areal
description of the continents; later pages present a short outline of
the features of rivers, and then the rivers of the world are taken
up. This is as if a text-book of botany should pass rapidly over the
structure and classification of plants, and devote most of its pages to
the flora of different regions. Again, Klöden’s compendious geography
includes a volume on ‘Physical Geography,’ in which much material
is gathered (3d ed., 1873); but the treatment is very uneven, as is
natural in the absence of a good scheme of classification. Glaciers
receive much attention, but valleys are rather curtly dismissed;
deltas are elaborately described, but little space is given to other
forms assumed by the waste of the land on the way to the sea. Ansted’s
‘Physical Geography’ (5th ed., 1871) contains abundant fact, but much
of it is a kind that is better presented on a map than in verbal form.
Many pages are devoted to statistical statements, from which no student
can gain inspiration for further study, for example: “The Danube
receives a large number of tributaries, of which the most important
are, on the right, the Isar, Inn, Raab, Drave, Save, Morave, and Isker.
On the left are the Altmühl, Regen, Waag, Gran, Theiss, Temes, Aluta,
Sereth, and Pruth. Many of these are large streams with other important
tributaries. The Danube drains upwards of 300,000 square miles of
country.”

A decided advance over earlier books in the way of rational or
explanatory treatment is found in the works of Peschel and Reclus; it
is to the former that a reaction against the historical treatment of
geography in Germany is largely due; while the latter is to be credited
with an enlarged attention to the detail of land forms; but the books
of neither of these authors recognize the systematic evolution of
land forms. The same may be said of various other treatises which
approach, but do not yet reach, the ideal that seems to be in sight.
One of the chief responsibilities of the geographer--the description of
landscape--can not be fully met by students who accept the principles
set forth in these books as their guides; for in spite of the
increasing attention given to the lands in modern books, and in spite
of the greater number of forms recognized, the combination of all forms
in a well-organized whole is not yet accomplished.

It seems to have been against the empirical method of such books as
Ansted’s that Huxley protested in his ‘Physiography,’ urging its
replacement by a more educative method. He wrote:

“I do not think that a description of the earth, which commences by
telling a child that it is an oblate spheriod, moving around the sun
in an elliptical orbit, and ends without giving him the slightest
hint towards an understanding of the ordnance map of his own country,
or any suggestion as to the meaning of the phenomena offered by the
brook which runs through his village, or of the gravel pit whence the
roads are mended, is calculated either to interest or to instruct....
Physiography has very little to do with this sort of Physical
Geography. My hearers were not troubled with much about latitudes
and longitudes, the heights of mountains, depths of seas, or the
geographical distribution of kangaroos or _Compositae_.... I endeavored
to give them ... a view of the ‘place in nature’ of a particular
district of England--the basin of the Thames--and to leave upon their
minds the impression that the muddy waters of our metropolitan river,
the hills between which it flows, the breezes which blow over it, are
not isolated phenomena, to be taken as understood because they are
familiar. On the contrary, I endeavored to show that the application of
the plainest and simplest processes of reasoning to any one of these
phenomena suffices to show, lying behind it, a cause, which again
suggests another; until, step by step, the conviction dawns upon the
learner that, to attain to even an elementary conception of what goes
on in his own parish, he must know something about the universe; that
the pebble he kicks aside would not be what it is and where it is,
unless a particular chapter of the earth’s history, finished untold
ages ago, had been exactly what it was.... Many highly valuable
compendia of Physical Geography, for the use of scientific students of
that subject, are extant; but in my judgment most of the elementary
works I have seen begin at the wrong end, and too often terminate in an
_ominum gatherum_ of scraps of all sorts of undigested and unconnected
information; thereby entirely destroying the educational value of that
study which Kant justly termed the ‘propædeutic of natural knowledge.’”
(Preface to ‘Physiography,’ 1878).

Here we find clear recognition of the need of introducing a
consideration of causes, just as was urged by Guyot; and furthermore a
recognition of the need of linking together in their natural relations
all the items which together constitute the content of the subject.
It may, however, be contended that the attempt to combine in a single
course of study the elementary principles of chemistry and physics,
of geology and astronomy, along with those of physical geography, is
not practicable from an educational point of view; such a combination
will not secure either the clear knowledge or the strong discipline
that can be derived from systematic courses in two or three of these
subjects, presented separately. Text-books like Hinman’s ‘Eclectic
Physical Geography’ and Mill’s ‘Realm of Nature,’ in both of which a
broad range of other than geographical subjects is covered, do not seem
to-day to be in so much favor as those books which attend more closely
to the true content of our subject. Indeed, with respect to physical
geography, considered from the scientific and educational point of
view, a report on College Entrance Requirements, recently published by
our National Educational Association,[D] presents the best definition
and outline of the subject that has yet appeared. It advises the
omission of irrelevant matter, however interesting such matter may be
in itself. The principles of physics and the succession of geological
formations with their fossils, the classification and distribution of
plants and animals must be taught elsewhere; but much profit may be
had from terrestrial phenomena by which the principles of physics are
illustrated, and from the consequences of past geological changes in
determining present geographical conditions, and especially from the
physiographic controls by which the distribution of organic forms is
determined.

    [D] Proceedings, 1899, 780-792; also in the _Journal of School
        Geography_, September, 1898.

The general scheme under which all land forms may receive explanatory
description must consider chiefly the movement and erosion of the
earth’s crust. Deformation offers a part of the earth’s crust to be
worked upon. Various destructive processes of erosion work upon the
offered mass, and the streams, with their transported waste, follow
the depressions in the carved surface. So important is the element
of erosion, and so leading is the part played by rivers in erosive
work, that McGee would gather all land forms under a classification
determined by their drainage systems.[E] Others have preferred a
classification based, first on peculiarities of structure as determined
by accumulation and deformation; and, secondly, on the progress of
erosion; but in either scheme, the erosive work of rivers is so
important that a sketch of the progress of the physical geography of
the lands towards a systematic classification of its items may well
follow the order in which valleys have been explained, branching
off, as occasion may require, from the leading theme of rivers that
flow under a normal humid climate to special conditions of erosion
under an arid or a frigid climate. The progress which has made the
physical geography of the lands what it is to-day is more the work of
geologists than of geographers; and the chief reason for this is the
indifference of many geographers to the physical side of their subject;
an indifference that was undoubtedly favored by the cultivation of
historical geography in continental Europe, and by the acceptance of
the traveler or explorer as a full-fledged geographer in Great Britain.
In the United States, it is only in the latter part of the century that
the physical geography of the lands has gained a scientific standing,
and the advantages that it now enjoys are geographical grafts upon a
geological stock.

    [E] _Nat. Geogr. Magazine_, i, 1889, 27-36.

The emancipation of geology from the doctrine of catastrophism was a
necessary step before progress could be made towards an understanding
of the lands. The slow movements of elevation and depression of certain
coasts in historic time were of great importance in this connection.
Studies of geological structures at last overcame the belief in the
sudden and violent upheaval of mountain chains, which, under the
able and authoritative advocacy of Elie de Beaumont, held a place
even into the second half of the century. But even when it came to
be understood that mountains and plateaus have been slowly upheaved,
it still remained to be proved that the valleys and canyons by which
they are drained were produced by erosion, and not by fractures and
unequal movements of elevation. Advance was here made on two lines.
Along one, a better understanding was gained of the forms producible by
deformation alone; along the other, sea currents, floods and earthquake
waves, to which the earlier observers trusted as a means of modifying
the forms of uplift, were gradually replaced by the slow action of
weather and water. Processes of deformation were found to act in a
large way, producing massive forms without detail--broad plains and
plateaus, extensive domes, straight cliffs and rolling corrugations;
and thus it was learned that the varied and detailed forms of lofty
mountain ranges and dissected plateaus must be ascribed almost
entirely to the processes of erosion. But it should be noted that in
exceptional instances land forms initiated by deformation, so recently
as to have suffered as yet only insignificant sculpture, may exhibit
much irregularity. The most striking example of this kind, an example
of the very highest value in the systematic study of land forms, is
that afforded by the diversely tilted lava blocks of Southern Oregon,
as described by Russell.[F]

    [F] 4th _Ann. Rep. U. S. Geol. Survey_, 1883.

Turning now to the second line of advance, it is noteworthy that
so keen an observer as Lesley insisted, as late as 1856, that the
peculiar topographical features of Pennsylvania, which he knew and
described so well, could have been produced only by a great flood.
But the principles of the uniformitarians were constantly gaining
ground against these older ideas; and after the appearance in England
of Scrope’s studies in Central France and of Greenwood’s polemic
little work on ‘Rain and Rivers’ (1857), victory may be said to have
been declared for the principles long before announced by Hutton and
Playfair, which, since then, have obtained general acceptance and
application.

Yet even the most ardent uniformitarians would, in the middle of the
century, go no further than to admit that rain and rivers could roughen
a region by carving valleys in it; no consideration was then given to
the possibility that, with longer and longer time, the hills must be
more and more consumed, the valleys must grow wider and wider open,
until, however high and uneven the initial surface may have been, it
must at last be reduced to a lowland of small relief. The surface of
such a lowland would truncate the underground structures indifferently;
but when such truncating surfaces were noticed (usually now at
considerable altitudes above sea level, as if elevated after having
been planed, and therefore more or less consumed by the erosion of a
new system of valleys), they were called plains of marine denudation
by Ramsay (1847), or plains of marine abrasion by Richthofen (1882).
Today it is recognized that both subaërial erosion and marine abrasion
are theoretically competent to produce lowlands of denudation; the
real question here at issue concerns the criteria by which the work of
either agency can be recognized in particular instances. In the middle
of the century, not only every plain of denudation, but every line of
escarpments was held by the marinists to be the work of sea waves; and
it was not till after a sharp debate that the bluffs of the chalk downs
which enclose the Weald of southeastern England were accepted as the
product of ordinary atmospheric weathering, instead of as the work of
the sea. Whitaker’s admirable essay on ‘Subaërial Denudation,’ which
may be regarded as having given the victory in this discussion to the
subaërialists, was considered so heterodox that it was not acceptable
for publication in the _Quarterly Journal_ of the Geological Society,
of London, but had to find a place in the more modest _Geological
Magazine_ (1867), whose pages it now honors. So signal indeed was this
victory that, in later years, the destructive work of the sea has been
not infrequently underrated in the almost exclusive attention given to
land sculpture by subaërial agencies. Truly, the sea does not erode
valleys; it does not wear out narrow lowlands of irregular form between
enclosing uplands, as was maintained by some of the most pronounced
marinists in the middle of the century; but it certainly does attack
continental borders in a most vigorous fashion, and many are the
littoral forms that must be ascribed to its work, as may be learned
from Richthofen’s admirable ‘Führer für Forschungsreisende’ (1886). As
this problem can not be further considered here, the reader may be at
once referred to the most general discussion of the subject that has
yet appeared, in an essay on ‘Shoreline Topography’ recently published
by F. P. Gulliver.[G]

    [G] _Proc. Amer. Acad._, Boston, 1899, 152-258.

At about the time when the subaërial origin of valleys and escarpments
was being established in England, the explorations and surveys of our
western territories were undertaken, and a flood of physiographic
light came from them. One of the earliest and most important of the
many lessons of the West was that Playfair’s law obtained even in the
case of the Grand canyon of the Colorado, which was visited by the
Ives expedition in 1858. Newberry, the geologist of the expedition,
concluded that both the deep and fissure-like canyon and the broader
valleys enclosed by cliff-like walls “belong to a vast system of
erosion, and are wholly due to the action of water.” Although he
bore the possibility of fractures constantly in mind and examined
the structure of the canyons with all possible care, he “everywhere
found evidence of the exclusive action of water in their formation.”
This conclusion has, since then, been amply confirmed by Powell and
Dutton, although these later observers might attribute a significant
share of the recession of cliffs in arid regions to wind action. In a
later decade, Heim demonstrated that the valleys of the Alps were not
explicable as the result of mountain deformation, and that they found
explanation only in river erosion. By such studies as these, of which
many examples could be given, the competence of rivers to carve even
the deepest valleys has been fully established; yet so difficult is it
to dislodge old-fashioned belief that Sir A. Geikie felt it necessary
to devote two chapters in his admirable ‘Scenery of Scotland’ (1887)
to prove that the bens of the Highlands were not so many individual
upheavals, but that the glens were so many separate valleys of erosion;
and as able an observer as Prestwich, a warm advocate of the erosion
of ordinary valleys by their rivers, maintained (1886), with the
results of our western surveys before him, that fissures were probably
responsible for the origin of the deep and narrow canyons of the
Colorado plateau.

The tumultuous forms of lofty mountains ‘tossed up’ as they seem to be
when viewed from some commanding height, are, in by far the greater
number of examples yet studied, undoubtedly the result of the slow
erosion of the valleys between them; but it should not be forgotten
that regions of very recent disturbances--as the earth counts time--may
possess strong inequalities directly due to deformation. The tilted
lava blocks of Oregon have already been mentioned. The bold forms
of the St. Elias Alps, also described by Russell, are regarded by
him as chiefly produced by the tilting of huge crustal blocks on
which erosion has as yet done relatively little work. An altogether
exceptional case is described by Dutton, who says that on the margin of
one of the “high plateaus of Utah a huge block seems to have cracked
off and rolled over, the beds opening with a V and forming a valley
of grand dimensions.” ‘Rift valleys,’ or trough-like depressions
produced by the down-faulting of long, narrow, crustal blocks with
respect to the bordering masses, are occasionally found, as in eastern
Africa, where the ‘Great Rift valley’ has been described by Gregory.
Trough-like depressions of similar origin, but much more affected by
the degradation of their borders and the aggradation of their floors,
are known to European geographers in the valleys of the Saône and of
the middle Rhine. But no rift valley, no depression between the tilted
lava blocks, resembles the branching valleys that are produced by the
erosive action of running water.

Thus far, while much attention had been given to the work of rivers,
little or no attention had been given to the arrangement of their
courses. It seems to have been tacitly assumed that the courses of all
streams were consequent upon the slope of the initial land surface. The
explicit recognition of this origin, indicated by the provision of a
special name, ‘consequent streams,’ was an important step in advance
due to our western geologists. The discovery soon followed that rivers
have held their courses through mountain ridges that slowly rose across
their path; the rivers, concentrating the drainage of a large headwater
region upon a narrow line, cut down their channels as the land was
raised. This idea first came into prominence through Powell’s report
on the Colorado River of the West (1875), in which he gave the name,
‘antecedent,’ to rivers of this class. He believed that the Green
river, in its passage through the Uinta mountains, was to be explained
as an antecedent stream. Much doubt has, however, been thrown upon
this interpretation. Other accounts of antecedent rivers have been
published, and to-day the Green is not so safe a type of antecedence
as the Rhine below Bingen, the Meuse in the Ardennes, or several of
the Himalayan rivers in the gorges that they have cut through the
youngest marginal ridges of the range.

Rapidly following the establishment of these two important classes
of valleys came the recognition of the very antithesis of antecedent
rivers in those streams which have grown by headward erosion along
belts of weak structure, without relation to the initial trough lines.
To these the term ‘subsequent’ has been applied. It is frequently
in association with streams of this class that drainage areas are
rearranged by the migration of divides, and that the upper waters
of one river are captured by the headward growth of another. This
is accomplished by a most beautiful process of inorganic natural
selection, which leads to a survival of the fittest and thus brings
about a most intimate adjustment of form to structure, whereby the
more resistent rock masses come to constitute the divides, and the
less resistent are chosen for the excavation of valleys. Many workers
have contributed to the solution of problems of this class; notably
Heim, in his studies of the northern Alps (1876), and Löwl, who
showed that, in folded mountain structures of great age, the original
courses of streams might be greatly altered through the development of
new lines of drainage (1882). A valuable summary of this subject is
given by Philippson in his ‘Studien über Wasserscheiden’ (1886). The
extraordinary depredations committed by the waxing Severn on the waning
Thames have recently been set forth by Buckman. The turning of side
branches from the slender trunk of the Meuse has been recognized in
France. Many remarkable instances of stream captures have been found in
the Appalachians, where the opportunity for the adjustment of streams
to structures has been exceptionally good. Hayes and Campbell have, on
the other hand, emphasized the importance of drainage modifications
independent of the growth of subsequent streams on weak structures,
but governed by a slight tilting of the region, whereby some streams
are accelerated and their opponents are retarded. It should be noted
that the proof of the adjustment or rearrangement of drainage marks a
victory for the uniformitarian school that is even more significant
than that gained in the case of the antecedent rivers; for in one case
a growing mountain range is subdued by the concentrated discharge of a
large drainage area; but in the other case, the mountain slowly melts
away under the attacks of the weather alone on the headwater slopes of
the growing valleys.

The reason why all these studies of land carving are of importance to
the geographer is that they greatly enlarge the number of type forms
that he may use in descriptions, and that they recognize the natural
correlations among various forms which must otherwise be set forth
in successive itemized statements. The brief terminology learned in
early school days, somewhat enlarged by a more mature variety of
adjectives, is usually the stock of words with which the explorer
tries to reproduce the features of the landscapes that he crosses,
and as a result his descriptions are often unintelligible; the region
has to be explored again before it can become known to those who do
not see it. The longitudinal relief of certain well-dissected coastal
plains, or the half-buried ranges of certain interior aggraded basins,
may be taken as examples of forms which are easily brought home and
familiarized by explanation, but which commonly remain remote and
unknown under empirical description.

It may be urged that in many geological discussions from which
geography has taken profit, consideration is given to form-producing
processes rather than to the forms produced. This was natural enough
while the subject was in the hands of geologists; but geographers
should take heed that they do not preserve the geological habit.
The past history of land forms and the action upon them of various
processes by which existing forms have been developed, are pertinent to
geography only in so far as they aid the observation and description of
the forms of to-day.

Further illustration of the growing recognition of form as the chief
object of the physiographic study of the lands is seen in the use
of the term, ‘geomorphology’ by some American writers; but more
important than the term is the principle which underlies it. This is
the acceptance of theorizing as an essential part of investigation
in geography, just as in other sciences. All explanation involves
theorizing. When theory is taken piecemeal and applied only to
elementary problems, such as the origin of deltas, it does not excite
unfavorable comment among geographers. But when the explanation of more
complicated features is attempted, and when a comprehensive scheme of
classification and treatment, in which theorizing is fully and frankly
recognized, is evolved for all land forms, then the conservatives
recoil, as if so bold a proposition would set them adrift on the
dangerous sea of unrestrained imagination. They forget that the harbor
of explanation can only be reached by crossing the seas of theory.
They are willing to cruise, like the early navigators, the empirical
explorers, only close along shore; not venturing to trust themselves
out of sight of the land of existing fact; but they have not learned to
embark upon the open ocean of investigation, trusting to the compass of
logical deduction and the rudder of critical judgment to lead them to
the desired haven of understanding of facts of the past.

One of the bolder explorers of the high seas of theory is Powell, who
defined in the term ‘baselevel’ an idea that had long been more or
less consciously present in the minds of geologists, and which has
been since then of the greatest service to physiographers. Powell and
his followers, especially Gilbert, Dutton and McGee, have consistently
carried the consequences of subaërial erosion to their legitimate end
in a featureless lowland, and have recognized the controlling influence
of the baselevel during all the sequence of changes from the initial to
the ultimate form. It is not here essential whether such a featureless
lowland exists or ever has existed, but it is absolutely essential to
follow the lead of deduction until all the consequences of the theory
of erosion are found; and then to accept as true those theoretical
deductions which successfully confront the appropriate facts of
observation. Only in this way can the error of regarding geography
as a purely observational natural science be corrected. Following
the acceptance of the doctrine of baselevels came the method of
reconstituting the original form initiated by deformation, as a means
of more fully understanding the existing form; for only by beginning
at the initial form can the systematic sequence of the changes wrought
by destructive processes be fully traced and the existing form
appreciated. This had often been done before in individual cases,
but it now became a habit, an essential step in geomorphological
study. Naturally enough, the terms of organic growth, such as young,
mature, old, revived, and so on, came to be applied to stages in the
development of inorganic forms; and thus gradually the idea of the
systematic physiographic development of land forms has taken shape.
This idea is to-day the most serviceable and compact summation of all
the work of the century on the physical geography of the lands. It
recognizes the results of deformation in providing the broader initial
forms on which details are to be carved. It gives special attention to
the work of destructive processes on these forms, and especially to the
orderly sequence of various stages of development, recognizing that
certain features are associated with youth, and others with maturity
and old age. It gives due consideration to the renewed movements of
deformation that may occur at any stage in the cycle of change, whereby
a new sequence of change is introduced. It gives appropriate place, not
only to the forms produced by the ordinary erosive action of rain and
rivers, but to the forms produced by ice and by wind action as well;
and it co-ordinates the changes that are produced by the sea on the
margin of the land with the changes that are produced by other agencies
upon its surface. It considers not only the various forms assumed by
the water of the land, such as torrents, rapids, falls and lakes,
appropriately arranged in a river system as to time and place, but also
the forms assumed by the waste of the land, which, like the water, is
on its way to the sea. In a word, it lengthens our own life, so that
we may, in imagination, picture the life of a geographical area as
clearly as we now witness the life of a quick-growing plant, and thus
as readily conceive and as little confuse the orderly development of
the many parts of a land form, its divides, cliffs, slopes and water
courses, as we now distinguish the cotyledons, stem, buds, leaves,
flowers and fruit of a rapidly-maturing annual that produces all these
forms in appropriate order and position in the brief course of a single
summer.

The time is ripe for the introduction of these ideas. The spirit of
evolution has been breathed by the students of the generation now
mature all through their growing years and its application to all lines
of study is demanded. It is true that the acceptance of inorganic as
well as of organic evolution is often implied rather than outspoken;
yet evolution is favorably regarded, as is proved by the eagerness
with which even school boards and school teachers, conservatives among
conservatives, hail the appearance of books in which the new spirit of
geography is revealed. In the last years of the century, the school
books most widely used in this country have made great advance in the
explanatory treatment of land forms. Tarr’s Physical Geographies and
Russell’s monographic volumes on the ‘Lakes,’ ‘Glaciers,’ ‘Volcanoes’
and ‘Rivers’ of North America, all presenting land forms in an
explanatory rather than an empirical manner, have been warmly welcomed
in this country. Penck’s ‘Morphologie der Erdoberfläche’ (1894),
although largely concerned with the historical development of the
subject, presents all forms as the result of process. De Lapparent’s
‘Leçons de géographie physique’ (1886) treats land forms generically;
and a second edition of the book is called for soon after the first.
‘Earth Sculpture,’ by James Geikie (1899), and Marr’s ‘Scientific Study
of Scenery’ (1900), carry modern ideas to British readers. There can be
little doubt that the books of the coming century will extend the habit
of explanation even further than it has yet reached.

This review of the advance of the century in the study of land forms,
the habitations of all the higher forms of life, might have been
concerned wholly with the concrete results of exploration, as was
implied in an earlier paragraph. Travels in the Far East of the Old
World, or in the Far West of the New, have yielded fact enough to fill
volumes. But such a view of the century has been here replaced by
another; not because the first is unimportant, for it is absolutely
essential, but because the second includes the first and goes beyond
it. Not the facts alone, but the principles that the facts exemplify,
demand our attention. These principles, founded upon a multitude of
observations, are the greater contribution of the closing to the
opening century in the study of the Forms of the Land.




